
--- Page 1 ---
81Biodiversity
UNIT 4:
Biodiversity
4.1 INTRODUCTION – DEFINITION: GENETIC, SPECIES, ECOSYSTEM DIVERSITY 82
4.1.1 Genetic diversity 82
4.1.2 Species diversity 82
4.1.3 Ecosystem diversity 83
4.2 BIOGEOGRAPHIC CLASSIFICATION OF INDIA 84
4.3 VALUE OF BIODIVERSITY: CONSUMPTIVE, PRODUCTIVE USE, SOCIAL, ETHICAL,
AESTHETIC AND OPTION VALUES 84
4.3.1Consumptive value 85
4.3.2 Productive value 86
4.3.3 Social value 86
4.3.4 Ethical value 88
4.3.5 Aesthetic value 88
4.3.6 Option value 88
4.4 BIODIVERSITY AT GLOBAL, NATIONAL AND LOCAL LEVELS 88
4.5 INDIA AS A MEGA DIVERSITY NATION 89
4.6 HOTSPOTS OF BIODIVERSITY 90
4.7 THREATS TO BIODIVERSITY: HABITAT LOSS, POACHING OF WILDLIFE,
MAN-WILDLIFE CONFLICTS 91
4.8 ENDANGERED AND ENDEMIC SPECIES OF INDIA 94
4.8.1 Common Plant species 94
4.8.2 Common Animal species 99
4.9 CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY: IN-SITU AND EX-SITU 104
4.9.1 In-situ conservation 104
4.9.2 Ex-situ conservation 108

--- Page 2 ---
82 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The great variety of life on earth has provided
for man’s needs over thousands of years. This
diversity of living creatures forms a support sys-
tem which has been used by each civilization
for its growth and development. Those that used
this “bounty of nature” carefully and sustainably
survived. Those that overused or misused it dis-
integrated.
Science has attempted to classify and catego-
rize the variability in nature for over a century.
This has led to an understanding of its organi-
zation into communities of plants and animals.
This information has helped in utilizing the
earth’s biological wealth for the benefit of hu-
manity and has been integral to the process of
‘development’. This includes better health care,
better crops and the use of these life forms as
raw material for industrial growth which has led
to a higher standard of living for the developed
world. However this has also produced the
modern consumerist society, which has had a
negative effect on the diversity of biological re-
sources upon which it is based. The diversity of
life on earth is so great that if we use it
sustainably we can go on developing new prod-
ucts from biodiversity for many generations. This
can only happen if we manage biodiversity as a
precious resource and prevent the extinction of
species.
Definition:
‘Biological diversity’ or biodiversity is that part
of nature which includes the differences in genes
among the individuals of a species, the variety
and richness of all the plant and animal species
at different scales in space, locally, in a region,
in the country and the world, and various types
of ecosystems, both terrestrial and aquatic,
within a defined area.
What is biodiversity?
Biological diversity deals with the degree of
nature’s variety in the biosphere. This variety can
be observed at three levels; the genetic variabil-
ity within a species, the variety of species within
a community, and the organisation of species
in an area into distinctive plant and animal com-
munities constitutes ecosystem diversity.
4.1.1 Genetic diversity
Each member of any animal or plant species dif-
fers widely from other individuals in its genetic
makeup because of the large number of com-
binations possible in the genes that give every
individual specific characteristics. Thus, for ex-
ample, each human being is very different from
all others. This genetic variability is essential for
a healthy breeding population of a species. If
the number of breeding individuals is reduced,
the dissimilarity of genetic makeup is reduced
and in-breeding occurs. Eventually this can lead
to the extinction of the species. The diversity in
wild species forms the ‘gene pool’ from which
our crops and domestic animals have been de-
veloped over thousands of years. Today the va-
riety of nature’s bounty is being further
harnessed by using wild relatives of crop plants
to create new varieties of more productive crops
and to breed better domestic animals. Modern
biotechnology manipulates genes for develop-
ing better types of medicines and a variety of
industrial products.
4.1.2 Species diversity
The number of species of plants and animals
that are present in a region constitutes its spe-
cies diversity. This diversity is seen both in natu-
ral ecosystems and in agricultural ecosystems.
Some areas are more rich in species than oth-
ers. Natural undisturbed tropical forests have a
much greater species richness than plantations
developed by the Forest Department for timber

--- Page 3 ---
83Biodiversity
production. A natural forest ecosystem provides
a large number of non-wood products that lo-
cal people depend on such as fruit, fuel wood,
fodder, fiber, gum, resin and medicines. Timber
plantations do not provide the large variety of
goods that are essential for local consumption.
In the long-term the economic sustainable re-
turns from non-wood forest products is said to
be greater than the returns from felling a forest
for its timber. Thus the value of a natural forest,
with all its species richness is much greater than
a plantation. Modern intensive agricultural eco-
systems have a relatively lower diversity of crops
than traditional agropastoral farming systems
where multiple crops were planted.
At present conservation scientists have been able
to identify and categorise about 1.8 million spe-
cies on earth. However, many new species are
being identified, especially in the flowering
plants and insects. Areas that are rich in species
diversity are called ‘hotspots’ of diversity. India
is among the world’s 15 nations that are excep-
tionally rich in species diversity.
4.1.3 Ecosystem diversity
There are a large variety of different ecosystems
on earth, which have their own complement of
distinctive inter linked species based on the dif-
ferences in the habitat. Ecosystem diversity can
be described for a specific geographical region,
or a political entity such as a country, a State or
a taluka. Distinctive ecosystems include land-
scapes such as forests, grasslands, deserts,
mountains, etc., as well as aquatic ecosystems
such as rivers, lakes, and the sea. Each region
also has man-modified areas such as farmland
or grazing pastures.
An ecosystem is referred to as ‘natural’ when it
is relatively undisturbed by human activities, or
‘modified’ when it is changed to other types of
uses, such as farmland or urban areas. Ecosys-
tems are most natural in wilderness areas. If
natural ecosystems are overused or misused their
productivity eventually decreases and they are
then said to be degraded. India is exceptionally
rich in its ecosystem diversity.
Evolution and the Genesis of Biodiversity:
The origins of life on earth some three and a
half billion years ago are obscure. Life was prob-
ably initiated as a product of organic reactions
in the Earth’s primordial seas. Alternative possi-
bilities such as life beginning in a muddy ooze,
or of life having been seeded from outer space
have also been suggested. Once life took hold
on the planet, it began gradually to diversify.
Unicellular unspecialized forms gradually evolved
into complex multi-cellular plants and animals.
Evolution is related to the ability of living organ-
isms to adapt to changes in their environment.
Thus the abiotic changes in nature such as cli-
matic and atmospheric upheavals, repeated gla-
ciations, continental drift and the formation of
geographical barriers, segregated different com-
munities of plants and animals and gradually
lead to the formation of new species over mil-
lions of years.
Most species appear to have a life span extend-
ing over several million years. Their adaptability
to gradual changes in their habitat, and inter-
actions with newly formed species produce
groups of inter linked organisms that continue
to evolve together. Food chains, prey-predator
relationships, parasitism (complete dependence
on another species), commensalism (a partner-
ship beneficial to both species), etc. are impor-
tant examples. Behavioural patterns of the
different species comprising a community of spe-
cies links them to each other through their
breeding biology, feeding patterns, migrations,
etc. As ancient species became extinct due to
geological upheavals, they left behind empty
‘niches’ in the habitat that stimulated existing
species to fill them through the formation of
new species. The Earth’s ancient history has seen
periods of mega extinctions, which have been
followed by periods of formation of new spe-
cies. Though these repeatedly led to a drastic

--- Page 4 ---
84 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
reduction in the number of species, the diver-
sity of life recuperated each time by gradually
increasing the number of species existing on
earth. This however took millions of years, as
evolution is a very slow process. Thus when man
came on the scene some 2 million years ago,
the earth was more rich in species than ever
before. During the recent past however, extinc-
tions due to the activities of modern man have
begun to take place so rapidly that nature has
had no time to evolve new species. The earth is
loosing species more rapidly than ever before.
The diversity of life at all three organisational
levels, genetic, species and ecosystem, is thus
being rapidly modified by modern man. This is
a great loss to future generations who will fol-
low us.
4.2 BIOGEOGRAPHIC CLASSIFICATION OF
INDIA
Our country can be conveniently divided into
ten major regions, based on the geography, cli-
mate and pattern of vegetation seen and the
communities of mammals, birds, reptiles, am-
phibia, insects and other invertebrates that live
in them. Each of these regions contains a vari-
ety of ecosystems such as forests, grasslands,
lakes, rivers, wetlands, mountains and hills,
which have specific plant and animal species.
India’s Biogeographic Zones
1. The cold mountainous snow covered Trans
Himalayan region of Ladakh.
2. The Himalayan ranges and valleys of Kash-
mir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Assam
and other North Eastern States.
3. The Terai, the lowland where the Himalayan
rivers flow into the plains.
4. The Gangetic and Bhramaputra plains.
5. The Thar Desert of Rajasthan.
6. The semi arid grassland region of the
Deccan plateau Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Andra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.
7. The Northeast States of India,
8. The Western Ghats in Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Kerala.
9. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
10.  The long western and eastern coastal belt
with sandy beaches, forests and mangroves.
4.3 VALUE OF BIODIVERSITY
Environmental services from species and eco-
systems are essential at global, regional and lo-
cal levels. Production of oxygen, reducing carbon
dioxide, maintaining the water cycle, protect-
ing soil are important services. The world now
acknowledges that the loss of biodiversity con-
tributes to global climatic changes. Forests are
the main mechanism for the conversion of car-
bon dioxide into carbon and oxygen. The loss
of forest cover, coupled with the increasing re-
lease of carbon dioxide and other gases through
industrialization contributes to the ‘greenhouse
effect’. Global warming is melting ice caps, re-
sulting in a rise in the sea level which will sub-
merge the low lying areas in the world. It is
causing major atmospheric changes, leading to
increased temperatures, serious droughts in
some areas and unexpected floods in other ar-
eas.
Biological diversity is also essential for preserv-
ing ecological processes, such as fixing and re-
cycling of nutrients, soil formation, circulation
and cleansing of air and water, global life sup-
port (plants absorb CO
2, give out O2), maintain-

--- Page 5 ---
85Biodiversity
ing the water balance within ecosystems, wa-
tershed protection, maintaining stream and river
flows throughout the year, erosion control and
local flood reduction.
Food, clothing, housing, energy, medicines, are
all resources that are directly or indirectly linked
to the biological variety present in the biosphere.
This is most obvious in the tribal communities
who gather resources from the forest, or
fisherfolk who catch fish in marine or freshwa-
ter ecosystems. For others, such as agricultural
communities, biodiversity is used to grow their
crops to suit the environment. Urban commu-
nities generally use the greatest amount of
goods and services, which are all indirectly drawn
from natural ecosystems.
It has become obvious that the preservation of
biological resources is essential for the well-be-
ing and the long-term survival of mankind. This
diversity of living organisms which is present in
the wilderness, as well as in our crops and live-
stock, plays a major role in human ‘develop-
ment’. The preservation of ‘biodiversity’ is
therefore integral to any strategy that aims at
improving the quality of human life.
4.3.1 Consumptive use value
The direct utilisation of timber, food, fuelwood,
fodder by local communities.
The biodiversity held in the ecosystem provides
forest dwellers with all their daily needs, food,
building material, fodder, medicines and a vari-
ety of other products. They know the qualities
and different uses of wood from different spe-
cies of trees, and collect a large number of local
fruits, roots and plant material that they use as
food, construction material or medicines.
Fisherfolk are highly dependent on fish and
know where and how to catch fish and other
edible aquatic animals and plants.
Man and the Web of Life
The Biodiversity of an area influences every
aspect of the lives of people who inhabit it.
Their living space and their livelihoods de-
pend on the type of ecosystem. Even people
living in urban areas are dependent on the
ecological services provided by the wilder-
ness in the PAs. We frequently don’t see this
in everyday life as it is not necessarily overt.
It is linked with every service that nature pro-
vides us. The quality of water we drink and
use, the air we breathe, the soil on which
our food grows are all influenced by a wide
variety of living organisms both plants and
animals and the ecosystem of which each
species is linked with in nature.
While it is well known that plant life removes
carbon dioxide and releases the oxygen we
breathe, it is less obvious that fungi, small
soil invertebrates and even microbes are es-
sential for plants to grow.
That a natural forest maintains the water in
the river after the monsoon, or that the ab-
sence of ants could destroy life on earth, are
to be appreciated to understand how we are
completely dependent on the living ‘web of
life’ on earth.
The wilderness is an outcome of a long evo-
lutionary process that has created an
unimaginably large diversity of living species,
their genetic differences and the various eco-
systems on earth in which all living creatures
live. This includes mankind as well. Think
about this and we cannot but want to pro-
tect out earth’s unique biodiversity. We are
highly dependent on these living resources.

--- Page 6 ---
86 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
4.3.2 Productive use value
Marketable goods.
Value of MFP>Timber (which is part of sus-
tainable use).
The biotechnologist uses biorich areas to ‘pros-
pect’ and search for potential genetic proper-
ties in plants or animals that can be used to
develop better varieties of crops that are used
in farming and plantation programs or to de-
velop better livestock. To the pharmacist, bio-
logical diversity is the raw material from which
new drugs can be identified from plant or ani-
mal products. To industrialists, biodiversity is a
rich store-house from which to develop new
products. For the agricultural scientist the
biodiversity in the wild relatives of crop plants is
the basis for developing better crops.
Genetic diversity enables scientists and farmers
to develop better crops and domestic animals
through careful breeding. Originally this was
done by selecting or pollinating crops artificially
to get a more productive or disease resistant
strain. Today this is increasingly being done by
genetic engineering, selecting genes from one
plant and introducing them into another. New
crop varieties (cultivars) are being developed
using the genetic material found in wild rela-
tives of crop plants through biotechnology.
Even today, species of plants and animals are
being constantly discovered in the wild. Thus
these wild species are the building blocks for
the betterment of human life and their loss is a
great economic loss to mankind. Among the
known species, only a tiny fraction have been
investigated for their value in terms of food, or
their medicinal or industrial potential.
Preservation of biodiversity has now become
essential for industrial growth and economic
development. A variety of industries such as
pharmaceuticals are highly dependent on iden-
tifying compounds of great economic value from
the wide variety of wild species of plants located
in undisturbed natural forests. This is called bio-
logical prospecting.
4.3.3 Social values
While traditional societies which had a small
population and required less resources had pre-
served their biodiversity as a life supporting re-
source, modern man has rapidly depleted it even
to the extent of leading to the irrecoverable loss
due to extinction of several species. Thus apart
from the local use or sale of products of
biodiversity there is the social aspect in which
more and more resources are used by affluent
societies. The biodiversity has to a great extent
been preserved by traditional societies that val-
ued it as a resource and appreciated that its
depletion would be a great loss to their society.
The consumptive and productive value of
biodiversity is closely linked to social concerns
in traditional communities. ‘Ecosystem people’
value biodiversity as a part of their livelihood as
well as through cultural and religious sentiments.
A great variety of crops have been cultivated in
traditional agricultural systems and this permit-
ted a wide range of produce to be grown and
marketed throughout the year and acted as an
insurance against the failure of one crop. In re-
cent years farmers have begun to receive eco-
nomic incentives to grow cash crops for national
or international markets, rather than to supply
local needs. This has resulted in local food short-
ages, unemployment (cash crops are usually
mechanised), landlessness and increased vulner-
ability to drought and floods.

--- Page 7 ---
87Biodiversity
Commonly used modern drugs derived from plant sources:
DRUG PLANT SOURCE USE
Atropine Belladonna Anticholinergic: reduces intestinal pain in diarrhoea.
Bromelain Pineapple Controls tissue inflammation due to infection.
Caffeine Tea, Coffee Stimulant of the central nervous system.
Camphor Camphor tree Rebefacient: increases local blood supply.
Cocaine Cocoa Analgesic and local anesthetic: reduces pain and
prevents pain during surgery.
Codeine Opium poppy Analgesic: reduces pain.
Morphine Opium poppy Analgesic: controls pain.
Colchicine Autumn crocus Anticancer agent.
Digitoxin Common foxglove Cardiac stimulant used in heart diseases.
Diosgenin Wild yams Source of female contraceptive: prevents pregnancy.
L-Dopa Velvet bean Controls Parkinson’s Disease which leads to jerky
movements of the hands
Ergotamine Smut-of-rye or ergot Control of haemorrhage and migraine headaches.
Glaziovine ocotea glaziovii Antidepressant: Elevates mood of depressed patients.
Gossypol Cotton Male contraceptive.
Indicine N-oxide heliotropium indicum Anticancer agent.
Menthol Mint Rubefacient: increases local blood supply and reduces
pain on local application.
Monocrotaline Cotolaria sessiliflora Anticancer agent.
Papain Papaya Dissolves excess protein and mucus, during digestion.
Penicillin Penicillium fungi General antibiotic, skills bacteria and controls infection
by various micro-organisms.
Quinine Yellow cinochona Antimalarial.
Reserpine Indian snakeroot Reduces high blood pressure.
Scopolamine Thorn apple Sedative.
Taxol Pacific yew Anticancer (ovarian).
Vinblastine, Rosy periwinkle Anticancer agent: Controls cancer in children.
vincristine (Vinca rosea) (Sadaphali)
From: ‘The Diversity of Life’; Edward O. Wilson
(Norton Paperback. In association with Havard University Press – 1993)

--- Page 8 ---
88 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
4.3.4 Ethical and moral values
Ethical values related to biodiversity conserva-
tion are based on the importance of protecting
all forms of life. All forms of life have the right
to exist on earth. Man is only a small part of the
Earth’s great family of species. Don’t plants and
animals have an equal right to live and exist on
our planet which is like an inhabited spaceship?
We do not know if life as we know it exists else-
where in the universe. Do we have the right to
destroy life forms or do we have a duty to pro-
tect them?
Apart from the economic importance of con-
serving biodiversity, there are several cultural,
moral and ethical values which are associated
with the sanctity of all forms of life. Indian civi-
lization has over several generations preserved
nature through local traditions. This has been
an important part of the ancient philosophy of
many of our cultures. We have in our country a
large number of sacred groves or ‘deorais’ pre-
served by tribal people in several States. These
sacred groves around ancient sacred sites and
temples act as gene banks of wild plants.
4.3.5 Aesthetic value
Knowledge and an appreciation of the presence
of biodiversity for its own sake is another rea-
son to preserve it. Quite apart from killing
wildlife for food, it is important as a tourist at-
traction. Biodiversity is a beautiful and wonder-
ful aspect of nature. Sit in a forest and listen to
the birds. Watch a spider weave its complex
web. Observe a fish feeding. It is magnificent
and fascinating.
Symbols from wild species such as the lion of
Hinduism, the elephant of Buddhism and dei-
ties such as Lord Ganesh, and the vehicles of
several deities that are animals, have been ven-
erated for thousands of years. Valmiki begins
his epic story with a couplet on the unfortunate
killing of a crane by a hunter. The ‘Tulsi’ has
been placed at our doorsteps for centuries.
4.3.6 Option value
Keeping future possibilities open for their use is
called option value. It is impossible to predict
which of our species or traditional varieties of
crops and domestic animals will be of great use
in the future. To continue to improve cultivars
and domestic livestock, we need to return to
wild relatives of crop plants and animals. Thus
the preservation of biodiversity must also include
traditionally used strains already in existence in
crops and domestic animals.
4.4 BIODIVERSITY AT GLOBAL, NATIONAL
AND LOCAL LEVELS
There are at present 1.8 million species known
and documented by scientists in the world. How-
ever, scientists have estimated that the number
of species of plants and animals on earth could
vary from 1.5 to 20 billion! Thus the majority of
species are yet to be discovered.
Most of the world’s bio-rich nations are in the
South, which are the developing nations. In con-
trast, the majority of the countries capable of
exploiting biodiversity are Northern nations, in
the economically developed world. These na-
tions however have low levels of biodiversity.
Thus the developed world has come to support
the concept that biodiversity must be consid-
ered to be a ‘global resource’. However, if
biodiversity should form a ‘common property
resource’ to be shared by all nations, there is no
reason to exclude oil, or uranium, or even intel-
lectual and technological expertise as global as-
sets. India’s sovereignty over its biological
diversity cannot be compromised without a revo-
lutionary change in world thinking about shar-
ing of all types of natural resources.

--- Page 9 ---
89Biodiversity
Countries with diversities higher than India are
located in South America such as Brazil, and
South East Asian countries such as Malaysia and
Indonesia. The species found in these countries,
however, are different from our own. This makes
it imperative to preserve our own biodiversity
as a major economic resource. While few of the
other ‘megadiversity nations’ have developed
the technology to exploit their species for bio-
technology and genetic engineering, India is ca-
pable of doing so.
Throughout the world, the value of biologically
rich natural areas is now being increasingly ap-
preciated as being of unimaginable value. In-
ternational agreements such as the World
Heritage Convention attempt to protect and
support such areas. India is a signatory to the
convention and has included several protected
Areas as World Heritage sites. These include
Manas on the border between Bhutan and In-
dia, Kaziranga in Assam, Bharatpur in U.P.,
Nandadevi in the Himalayas, and the Sunderbans
in the Ganges delta in West Bengal.
India has also signed the Convention in the
Trade of Endangered Species (CITES) which
is intended to reduce the utilization of endan-
gered plants and animals by controlling trade in
their products and in the pet trade.
4.5 INDIA AS A MEGA DIVERSITY NATION
Geological events in the landmass of India have
provided conditions for high levels of biological
diversity. A split in the single giant continent
around 70 million years ago, led to the forma-
tion of northern and southern continents, with
India a part of Gondwanaland - the southern
landmass, together with Africa, Australia and
the Antarctic. Later tectonic movements shifted
India northward across the equator to join the
Northern Eurasian continent. As the interven-
ing shallow Tethis Sea closed down, plants and
animals that had evolved both in Europe and in
the Far East migrated into India before the
Himalayas had formed. A final influx came from
Africa with Ethiopian species, which, were
adapted to the Savannas and semi-arid regions.
Thus India’s special geographical position be-
tween three distinctive centres of biological evo-
lution and radiation of species is responsible for
our rich and varied biodiversity.
Among the biologically rich nations, India stands
among the top 10 or 15 countries for its great
variety of plants and animals, many of which
are not found elsewhere. India has 350 differ-
ent mammals (rated eight highest in the world),
1,200 species of birds (eighth in the world), 453
species of reptiles (fifth in the world) and 45,000
plant species, of which most are angiosperms,
(fifteenth in the world). These include especially
high species diversity of ferns (1022 species) and
orchids (1082 species). India has 50,000 known
species of insects, including 13,000 butterflies
and moths. It is estimated that the number of
unknown species could be several times higher.
It is estimated that 18% of Indian plants are
endemic to the country and found nowhere
else in the world. Among the plant species the
flowering plants have a much higher degree of
endemism, a third of these are not found else-
where in the world. Among amphibians found
in India, 62% are unique to this country. Among
lizards, of the 153 species recorded, 50% are
endemic. High endemism has also been re-
corded for various groups of insects, marine
worms, centipedes, mayflies and fresh water
sponges.
India’s World Number of
Ranking species in India
Mammals 8th 350
Birds 8th 1200
Reptiles 5th 453
Amphibia 15th 182
Angiosperms 15th-20th 14,500

--- Page 10 ---
90 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
Apart from the high biodiversity of Indian wild
plants and animals there is also a great diversity
of cultivated crops and breeds of domestic live-
stock. This is a result of several thousand years
during which civilizations have grown and flour-
ished in the Indian subcontinent. The traditional
cultivars included 30,000 to 50,000 varieties of
rice and a number of cereals, vegetables and
fruit. The highest diversity of cultivars is con-
centrated in the high rainfall areas of the West-
ern Ghats, Eastern Ghats, Northern Himalayas
and the North-Eastern hills.
Gene-banks have collected over 34,000 cereals
and 22,000 pulses grown in India. India has 27
indigenous breeds of cattle, 40 breeds of sheep,
22 breeds of goats and 8 breeds of buffaloes.
4.6 HOTSPOTS OF BIODIVERSITY
The earth’s biodiversity is distributed in specific
ecological regions. There are over a thousand
major ecoregions in the world. Of these, 200
are said to be the richest, rarest and most dis-
tinctive natural areas. These areas are referred
to as the Global 200.
It has been estimated that 50,000 endemic
plants which comprise 20% of global plant life,
probably occur in only 18 ‘hot spots’ in the
world. Countries which have a relatively large
proportion of these hot spots of diversity are
referred to as ‘megadiversity nations’.
The rate at which the extinction of species is
occurring throughout our country remains ob-
Global species diversity
Group No. of Described Species
Bacteria and blue-green algae 4,760
Fungi 46,983
Algae 26,900
Bryophytes (Mosses and Liverworts) 17,000 (WCMC, 1988)
Gymnosperms (Conifers) 750 (Reven et al., 1986)
Angiosperms (Flowering plants) 250,000 (Reven et al., 1986)
Protozoans 30,800
Sponges 5,000
Corals and Jellyfish 9,000
Roundworms and earthworms 24,000
Crustaceans 38,000
Insects 751,000
other arthropods and minor Invertebrates 132,461
Molluscs 50,000
Starfish 6,100
Fishes (Teleosts) 19,056
Amphibians 4,184
Reptiles 6,300
Birds 9,198 (Clements, 1981)
Mammals 4,170 (Honacki et al., 1982)
Total: 1,435,662 SPECIES
From ‘Conserving the World’s Biological Diversity WRI, IUCN, CI, WWF-US, The World Bank.’

--- Page 11 ---
91Biodiversity
scure. It is likely to be extremely high as our wil-
derness areas are shrinking rapidly. Our globally
accepted national ‘hot spots’ are in the forests
of the North-East and the Western Ghats,
which are included in the world’s most biorich
areas. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are
extremely rich in species and many subspecies
of different animals and birds have evolved.
Among the endemic species i.e. those species
found only in India, a large proportion are con-
centrated in these three areas. The Andaman
and Nicobar Islands alone have as many as 2200
species of flowering plants and 120 species of
ferns. Out of 135 genera of land mammals in
India, 85 (63%) are found in the Northeast. The
Northeast States have 1,500 endemic plant spe-
cies. A major proportion of amphibian and rep-
tile species, especially snakes, are concentrated
in the Western Ghats, which is also a habitat
for 1,500 endemic plant species.
Coral reefs in Indian waters surround the
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep
Islands, the Gulf areas of Gujarat and Tamil
Nadu. They are nearly as rich in species as tropi-
cal evergreen forests!
4.7 THREATS TO BIODIVERSITY: HABITAT
LOSS, POACHING OF WILDLIFE, MAN-WILD-
LIFE CONFLICTS
Man has begun to overuse or misuse most of
these natural ecosystems. Due to this ‘unsus-
tainable’ resource-use, once productive forests
and grasslands have been turned into deserts
and wasteland have increased all over the world.
Mangroves have been cleared for fuelwood and
prawn farming, which has led to a decrease in
the habitat essential for breeding of marine fish.
Wetlands have been drained to increase agri-
cultural land. These changes have grave eco-
nomic implications in the longer term.
The current destruction of the remaining large
areas of wilderness habitats, especially in the
CASE STUDY
Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary – Sawai
Madhopur, Rajashtan
While conservation efforts are associated
with conflicts between villagers and Forest
Officials in most Protected Areas across the
country, the Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary in
Rajasthan has involved local community ini-
tiatives for conservation and regeneration.
The Sanctuary was initiated in 1983, over
674 sq km forming a part of the 1334 sq km
Ranthambore Tiger Reserve. It is located
within the Karauli and Sapotra blocks of
Sawai Madhopur district.
The primary occupation of the predominant
Meena and Gujjar communities is pastoral-
ism and subsistence agriculture.
Pressures on the sanctuary included migrant
grazers known as the Rabaris, who came
from the Mewar region of Rajasthan with
herds of over 150,000 sheep. Other pres-
sures were from exploitation of timber and
fuelwood and mining. The threat poised by
the migrant grazers spurred the formation
of the “Baragaon ki Panchayat” in 1990,
which in turn initiated a ‘Bhed Bhagao
Andolan’.
The Forest Department supported the villag-
ers in the formation of Forest Protection
Committees and Van Suraksha Samitis. The
benefits of involving local people in protec-
tion of their resources were obvious. Illegal
felling was checked. The use of forest re-
sources for local use was monitored. The
Forest Protection Committees (FPCs)  were
also successful in stopping the mining in the
Sanctuary. Mining is now banned in the
Sanctuary. The people not only protect their
forests but also use their resources judi-
ciously.

--- Page 12 ---
92 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
super diverse tropical forests and coral reefs, is
the most important threat worldwide to
biodiversity. Scientists have estimated that hu-
man activities are likely to eliminate approxi-
mately 10 million species by the year 2050.
There are about 1.8 million species of plants and
animals, both large and microscopic, known to
science in the world at present. The number of
species however is likely to be greater by a fac-
tor of at least 10. Plants and insects as well as
other forms of life not known to science are
continually being identified in the worlds’ ‘hot-
spots’ of diversity. Unfortunately at the present
rate of extinction about 25% of the worlds’ spe-
cies will undergo extinction fairly rapidly. This
may occur at the rate of 10 to 20 thousand spe-
cies per year, a thousand to ten thousand times
faster than the expected natural rate! Human
actions could well exterminate 25% of the
world’s species within the next twenty or thirty
years. Much of this mega extinction spasm  is
related to human population growth, industri-
alization and changes in land-use patterns. A
major part of these extinctions will occur in ‘bio-
rich’ areas such as tropical forests, wetlands, and
coral reefs. The loss of wild habitats due to rapid
human population growth and short term eco-
nomic development are major contributors to
the rapid global destruction of biodiversity.
Island flora and fauna having high endemism in
small isolated areas surrounded by sea have so
far been most seriously affected by human ac-
tivity, which has already led to extinction of many
island plants and animals (the dodo is a famous
example). Habitat loss also results from man’s
introduction of species from one area into an-
other, disturbing the balance in existing com-
munities. In the process, the purposely or
accidentally introduced organisms (
Eupatorium,
Lantana , Hyacinth, Congress grass or
Parthenium) have led to the extinction of many
local species.
Loss of species occurs due to the destruction of
natural ecosystems, either for conversion to
agriculture or industry, or by over-extraction of
their resources, or through pollution of air, wa-
ter and soil.
In India, forests and grasslands are continuously
being changed to agricultural land. Encroach-
ments have been legalized repeatedly. Similarly
natural wetland systems have been drained to
establish croplands resulting in loss of aquatic
species. Grasslands that were once sustainably
used by a relatively smaller number of human
beings and their cattle are either changed to
other forms of use or degraded by overgrazing.
CASE STUDY:
Kokkare Bellure – Karnataka: Co-exist-
ence (Man and Wildlife)
The pelican, which is an endangered species
breeds in large numbers at Kokkare Bellur
which is one of the ten known breeding sites
in India. Kokkare Bellure is a village in
Karnataka in Southern India. In December
every year, hundreds of spot billed pelicans,
painted storks, ibis and other birds migrate
to this area to establish breeding colonies
on the tall tamarind trees in the center of
the village. The local people have protected
the birds, believing that they bring good luck
with regard to rain and crops. The villagers
collect a rich supply of the natural fertilizer
that collects below the nests – the 
guano.
The droppings of fish-eating birds are rich in
nitrates.
The owners of the trees inhabited by the
birds dig deep pits under the trees, into which
the guano falls. Silt from nearby lakes and
ponds is mixed with the guano which is used
in their fields and sold as fertilizer. They have
now planted trees around their homes to
encourage nesting.

--- Page 13 ---
93Biodiversity
Our natural forests are being deforested for tim-
ber and replanted using teak, sal or other single
species for their timber value. Such plantations
do not support the same biological diversity as
a multi-storied natural forest, which has a closed
canopy and a rich understorey of vegetation.
When excessive firewood is collected from the
forest by lopping the branches of trees, the for-
est canopy is opened up and this alters local
biodiversity. Foraging cattle retard the regen-
eration of the forest as seedlings are constantly
trampled.
Increasing human population on the fringes of
our Protected Areas degrade forest ecosystems.
This is a major factor to consider in evaluating
the quality of the ecosystem. Repeated fires
started by local grazers to increase grass growth
ultimately reduces regeneration and lowers the
diversity of plant species. Without alternate
sources of fodder this pressure cannot be de-
creased.
Another factor that disrupts forest biodiversity
is the introduction of exotic weeds which are
not a part of the natural vegetation. Common
examples in India are lantana bushes, Eupato-
rium shrubs and ‘congress’ grass. These have
been imported into the country from abroad and
have invaded several large tracts of our natural
forests. These weeds spread at the expense of
the diverse range of indigenous undergrowth
species. The impact on the diversity of insect,
bird and other wildlife species, though not ad-
equately studied, is quite obvious.
In our country a variety of traditional farming
techniques have evolved over several centuries.
Cultivation by slash and burn in the Himalayas,
and ‘rab’ by lopping of tree branches to act as a
wood-ash fertilizer in the Western Ghats, are
two such systems. When human population in
these areas was low, these were sustainable
methods of agriculture. Unfortunately these ar-
eas now have a large number of people who
subsist largely on forest agriculture. These meth-
ods are now unsustainable and are leading to a
loss of forest biodiversity.
Overharvesting of fish, especially by trawling is
leading to serious depletion of fish stocks. Turtles
are being massacred off the coast of Orissa. The
rare whale shark, a highly endangered species,
is being killed off the coast of Gujarat.
Poaching: Specific threats to certain animals are
related to large economic benefits. Skin and
bones from tigers, ivory from elephants, horns
from rhinos and the perfume from the must deer
are extensively used abroad. Bears are killed for
their gall bladders. Corals and shells are also col-
lected for export or sold on the beaches of
Chennai and Kanyakumari. A variety of wild
plants with real or at times dubious medicinal
value are being over harvested. The commonly
collected plants include Rauvolfia, Nuxvomica,
Datura, etc. Collection of garden plants includes
orchids, ferns and moss.
The Rights of Species
We do not see all the varied functions that
biodiversity plays in our lives because they
are not obvious. We rarely see how they are
controlling our environment unless we study
nature. Thus we tend to take short-term ac-
tions that can have serious impacts on
biodiversity leading to even extinction of spe-
cies by disturbing their habitats. Man has no
right to do so. We only share this planet with
millions of other species that also have a right
to survive on earth. It is morally wrong to
allow man’s actions to lead to the extinction
of species.

--- Page 14 ---
94 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
4.8 ENDANGERED AND ENDEMIC SPECIES
OF INDIA
To appreciate the endemic and endangered spe-
cies of India it is important to understand the
wide variety of plant and animal species that
are found in the country.
Of the well-known species, there are several
which are endangered by human activity. The
endangered species in the country are
categorised as Vulnerable, Rare, Indeterminate
and Threatened. Other species are found only
in India and are thus endemic or restricted to
our country. Some of these may have very lo-
calized distribution and are considered highly
endemic.
Several plant and animal species in the country
are now found in only one or a few Protected
Areas. Among the important endangered ani-
mals are charismatic species such as the tiger,
the elephant, the rhino, etc. The less well-known
major mammals restricted to a single area in-
clude the Indian wild ass, the Hangul or
Kashmir stag, the Golden langur, the pygmy
hog and a host of others. There are also endan-
gered bird species such as the Siberian crane,
the Great Indian Bustard, the Florican and
several birds of prey. During the recent past,
vultures which were common a decade ago,
have suddenly disappeared and are now
highly threatened. Equally threatened are sev-
eral species of reptiles and amphibia. Many
invertebrates are also threatened, including a
large number of species that inhabit our coral
reefs.
Many plant species are now increasingly threat-
ened due to changes in their habitats induced
by human activity. Apart from major trees,
shrubs and climbers that are extremely habitat
specific and thus endangered, there are thou-
sands of small herbs which are greatly threat-
ened by habitat loss. Several orchids are yet
another group of plants that are under threat.
Many plants are threatened due to overharvest-
ing as ingredients in medicinal products.
To protect endangered species India has created
the Wildlife Protection Act. This includes lists of
plants and animals categorised according to the
threat on their survival.
We know so little about the species diversity of
our country. There are several groups of which
we know very little. Most of us are only aware
of the plight of a few glamorous large mam-
mals, but we need to appreciate the threat to
the less known species of plants and animals.
We need to find ways to support the conserva-
tion of our incredible wildlife for future genera-
tions.
4.8.1 Common Plant species
Teak: This tree is from the Southwest parts of
peninsular India. It is a common tree in decidu-
ous forests. It yields a much sought after timber
used for making excellent furniture. During the
early British period it was cut down from many
forest tracts to build ships. As the stocks were
diminishing, the British selected areas which they
called Reserved Forests where teak was planted
for the Government’s use. Teak is grown ex-
tensively by the Forest Department and is a
highly priced wood.
The teak tree is identified by its large leaves,
which grow to more than 40 or 50cms long and
20cms wide. It has tiny flowers and fruit. In the
winter, the trees shed all their leaves. In the
growing season, which begins in April and ex-
tends through the monsoon, teak forests are
bright green and shady. Most natural teak for-
ests have various other species of plants and
have a large number of wild animals. Some ar-
eas of teak forests that have exceptional popu-
lations of wildlife have been included in our
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.

--- Page 15 ---
95Biodiversity
Neem
Sal: This is a common species of several types
of forests of the Northeastern region of India,
extending into Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. It
has bright green foliage and its canopy remains
green nearly throughout the year. Sal wood is
hard and durable. Sal gets a large number of
seeds which are used in making cosmetics. The
sal forests are rich in wild mammals, birds, rep-
tiles and insect life. Several areas are included
in our network of National Parks and Sanctuar-
ies.
Mango: This has become one of our most popu-
lar horticultural species with different varieties
grown all over the country. The wild mango tree
has small tangy fruit and a big seed in compari-
son to the large pulpy fruit used in horticulture.
The mango tree is an evergreen species and gets
small flowers that are pollinated by insects. In
the forest, fruit dependent animals such as
monkeys, squirrels and fruit eating birds relish
its ripe fruit.
berries on which the larvae feed and grow. The
ficus trees bear berries throughout the year, thus
supplying nutritious food to several animal spe-
cies when other trees have no fruit. Ficus spe-
cies are thus known as ‘keystone’ species in the
ecosystem and support a major part of the food
web in several ecosystems. Ficus trees such as
Peepal and Banyan are considered sacred and
are protected in India.
Neem: This species is known as 
Azadirachta In-
dica. It has been traditionally used in indigenous
medicine. It has small yellow fruit. The leaves
and fruit are bitter to taste. It is used extensively
as an environmentally friendly insecticide. It
grows extremely well in semi-arid regions and
can be planted in afforestation programs where
soil is poor and rainfall is low.
Ficus sp.: Peepal, Banyan and many other ficus
species form a part of this group of important
trees. They are all ecologically of great impor-
tance as many different species of insects, birds
and mammals live on ficus berries. The flowers
are inside the berries. They are pollinated by a
specific wasp which lays its eggs inside the
Mango
Ficus
Tamarind: One of the best known Indian trees,
it grows to a large size and is known to live for
over 200 years. Its familiar fruit is a curved pod
with sour pulp and contains a number of squar-
ish seeds. The pulp in the fresh fruit is either
green or red. As it ripens, it turns sticky and
brown and separates from the skin. The tree is
commonly cultivated as a shade tree and for its
edible sour fruit which contains high concen-
trations of vitamin C. It is used as an additive in
food to give a tangy flavour. It is valued for its
timber as well as for fuelwood.

--- Page 16 ---
96 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
Babul: This is a thorny species that is character-
istic of semi arid areas of Western India and the
Deccan plateau. It grows sparsely in tracts of
grassland and around farms. It is used for fod-
der and fuelwood. It remains green throughout
the year even under the driest conditions and is
browsed by wild animals and cattle. It has small
leaves and bright yellow flowers and small seed-
pods with multiple seeds. Its main characteristic
is its long sharp, straight thorns which prevent
excessive browsing of its older branches.
Zizyphus: These are the typical small trees and
shrubs that are found in the arid and semi arid
areas of India. 
Z. mauritiana and Z. jujuba are
the most frequent species. It is a favourite of
frugivorous birds. The tree fruits extensively and
is eaten by a variety of birds and mammals. The
popular fruit is commonly collected and sold in
local markets.
Jamun: This tree is an evergreen species which
has a tasty purple fruit. It is a favourite with not
only people but also with many wild birds and
mammals. It grows in many parts of India and
has several varieties with fruit of different sizes.
branches profusely forming a dense crown. The
leaves are elliptical and leathery and its young
leaves are extensively used for making ‘bidis’.
The fruit is brownish yellow and astringent.
Tendu leaf collection necessitates burning un-
dergrowth and slashing the branches of the trees
to get at the leaves. The resulting disturbance
to wildlife is a serious issue in Protected Areas.
Jackfruit: A tree that is planted around many
villages and has huge fruit growing from its
branches. The fruit has a prickly skin. The fruit
when unripe is cooked. Once ripe it is eaten raw
after it turns into a sweet, sticky, golden-yellow
fruit which has a strong smell.
Flame of the Forest (Butea monosperma):
This tree grows in many parts of India. It has
bright orange flowers when it is leafless, thus it
is called ‘flame of the forest’. The flowers are
full of nectar which attracts monkeys and many
nectar dependent birds.
Jamun
Tendu is a mid-sized, deciduous tree, common
in dry deciduous forests throughout the Sub-
continent. There are around 50 Indian species.
Its bark exfoliates in large rectangular scales. It
Flame of
the forest
Coral Tree (Erythrina): A common deciduous
tree that is leafless in February when it gets
bright scarlet flowers that are used for their
nectar by many birds such as mynas, crows and
sunbirds, that act as its major pollinators. Its long
black seed pods contain several shiny brown
seeds which germinate well. This tree can also
be propagated by cutting and planting its young

--- Page 17 ---
97Biodiversity
branches. It is a rapid grower and usually be-
gins to flower in four or five years time.
Amla: This deciduous medium sized tree is
known for its sour, green-yellow fruit which is
rich in vitamin C. It is used as a medicine, in
pickles and for dying and tanning. It is frequently
referred to as the Indian ‘olive’, to which it has
no similarity either in appearance or taste.
Dipterocarps: This group of trees grows in ev-
ergreen forests of the southern part of the
Western Ghats and in the Northeast of India, in
high rainfall areas. It grows to an enormous
height with a wide girth. The seed has a pair of
wing like structures which aid in wind dispersal.
Quercus (Oak) is a large tree and is economi-
cally an important genus which includes many
trees known for their beautiful shape and their
changing seasonal colours. There are 30 to 40
Indian species of this genus found in the tem-
perate areas throughout the Himalayas. The fruit
is a large, hard, solitary characteristic nut (acorn).
Oaks provide the finest hardwoods of great
strength and durability and were once used for
building ships and bridges. It is a famous wood
for high quality furniture. Some of its species
are excellent fodder plants.
Pine: There are 5 species of true pines that are
found in India in the Himalayan region. The tim-
ber of these trees is frequently used in construc-
tion, carpentry and the paper industry. Pine resin
is used to make turpentine, rosin, tar and pitch.
Pine oils are obtained by distillation of leaves
and shoots. Pine leaves are thin and needle-like.
The male and female spores are produced in
woody cones. Dispersal of pollen is aided by each
grain having two wings.
Cycas: These plants are uncommon in India and
have a palm-like appearance. Cycads along with
conifers make up the gymnosperms. They are
among the most primitive seed plants, and have
remained virtually unchanged through the past
200 million years. There are five species found
in India, mostly in high rainfall areas.
Coconut: This tall stately palm has a more or
less straight trunk with circular markings. It
mostly grows in coastal plains. The base is sur-
rounded by a mass of fine roots. It produces the
familiar coconut, filled with liquid and a soft
white edible, initially jelly like material that hard-
ens when the fruit ripens. It is a common ingre-
dient of food in India, especially in the Southern
States. It is extensively cultivated along the
coastal regions and islands of India. Most parts
of the tree yield several useful products such as
broomsticks from its leaves and fiber from the
husk of dried coconuts.
Orchids: This is the largest group of flowering
plants in the world with over 18,000 known
species. Of these, 1500 species are found in In-
dia, making it one of the largest plant families
in the country with a high concentration of a
staggering 700 species in the Northeastern
States. These plants are terrestrial or epiphytic
herbs. Flowers show a range of bright colours
Erythrina
 Pine

--- Page 18 ---
98 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
and great variations in structure. In some spe-
cies, one of the petals is distinct from the others
and is called a lip or labellum. This colourful petal
attracts pollinators. In India a large number of
orchid species are found in the Western Ghats,
the Northeast, and the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands. Orchids are however seen in several eco-
logical conditions except extremes such as very
cold or very hot and dry ecosystems.
Drosera: This is a small insectivorous plant, usu-
ally 5 or 6cms in height, which has tiny hair which
secrete a sticky droplet of fluid on which insects
get stuck. The leaf winds around the struggling
insect which is then slowly digested. The plant
has pretty flowers. It grows in shal-
low poor quality soil. It is a rare
plant and is found in small patches.
Lotus: An aquatic floating plant
with a large rhizome, which is
rooted in mud. Its leaves are circu-
lar flat and covered with a waxy
coating which protects it from
water. The flower grows on an
erect stalk with several petals rang-
ing from pink violet to white. The
fruit is a spongy cone with mul-
tiple round seeds. It is widely dis-
tributed in wetland habitats and
shallow parts of lakes and marshy
areas. The rhizome, stalks of the leaves and
seeds are considered delicacies. The fruit is used
for dry decorations. The flower has been a tra-
ditional motif in Indian art. The lotus is the Na-
tional flower of India.
Grasses: Grasses form the second largest group
of flowering plants in the world. They are a very
important group of plants as they are used for
various purposes such as making fiber, paper,
thatching material for roofs, oil, gum, medicines
and many other useful products. The economi-
cally important grasses include sugarcane, bam-
boo and cereals like rice, wheat, millets, maize,
etc. Grasses are important as they provide fod-
der for domestic animals.
Bamboo: This is a group of large grasslike spe-
cies that grow as a clump to great heights in
many forests of India. It is extremely useful and
is used for constructing huts and making sev-
eral useful household articles in rural areas such
as baskets, farm implements, fences, household
implements, matting, etc. The young shoots are
used as food. It is extensively used in the pulp
and paper industry as a raw material.
Bamboos flower after more than two decades.
The plant then dies. The flowering produces
thousands of seeds which results in the slow
Orchid
Drosera

--- Page 19 ---
99Biodiversity
regrowth of the bamboo. Bamboo is a favorite
food of elephants and other large herbivores of
the forest such as gaur and deer.
Wild relatives of crop plants: All our present
day cultivated varieties of rice, which are grown
for food, come from wild varieties of rice, many
of which have originated in India, China and
Indonesia. Rice forms one of the staple foods of
the world. Although wild varieties are not used
as food crops, they are important as they con-
tain genes, which can be used to develop dis-
ease or pest resistance in crops. Many local
varieties of rice have already been lost, as most
farmers now grow only high yielding varieties.
4.8.2 Common Animal species
Mammals:
The common deer species found in India include
the sambar, chital, barasingha and barking deer.
Sambar live in small family parties especially in
hilly forested areas and feed mainly on shrubs
and leaves of low branches. They are dark brown
in colour and have large thick antlers, each hav-
ing 3 branches. Chital or spotted deer live in
large herds in forest clearings where they graze
on the grass. They have a rust brown body with
white spots which camouflages them in the for-
est. Each antler has three branches called tines.
The rare Hangul deer is found only in Kashmir.
It has a magnificent spread of antlers with 6
branches on each antler. The Barasingha, or
swamp deer, has wide hoofs that enable this
beautiful animal to live in boggy areas of the
Terai. Each antler has 6 or more branches. The
tiny barking deer lives in many forest areas all
over India. It has two ridges on its face and a
short antler with only 2 branches. Its call sounds
like the bark of a dog.
Chital
Barasingha
Blackbuck
Chinkara
Nilgai
The blackbuck is the only true antelope found
in India. It lives in large herds. The males are
black on top and cream below and have beau-
tiful spiral horns that form a ‘V’ shape. The
chinkara, also known as the Indian gazelle, is
a smaller animal and is pale brown in colour it
has beautiful curved horns. The rare
Chausingha, or four horned antelope, is the
only animal in the world that has four horns.
The nilgai is the largest of the dryland herbi-

--- Page 20 ---
100 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
A very special rare species is the Indian wild
ass, endemic to the Little Rann of Kutch. Hima-
layan pastures support several species of wild
goats and sheep, many of them restricted to
the region, like the goral and the Himalayan
tahr. A single species, the Nilgiri tahr is found
in the Nilgiri and Annamalai hills in south India.
The rhinocerous is now restricted to Assam but
was once found throughout the Gangetic plains.
The wild buffalo is now also restricted to the
Terai. The elephant is distributed in the North-
eastern and Southern States. It is threatened by
habitat loss and poaching for ivory. Gaur is
found in patches in several well-wooded parts
of India.
The best known predator of our forests is the
tiger. Its gold and black stripes hide it perfectly
in the forest undergrowth. It preys on herbivores
such as sambar or chital or less frequently on
domestic animals. The tiger kills only three or
four times a month. Its numbers have declined
due to poaching for its superb skin, and for the
supposed magical value of its teeth, claws and
whiskers. In the recent past it has been exten-
sively killed for the supposed medicinal proper-
ties of its bones that are used in Chinese
medicine.
The Asiatic lion is now found only in the Gir
forests of Gujarat.
The leopard is more adaptable than the tiger
and lives both in thick forests and degraded for-
est areas. Its beautiful ring like markings cam-
ouflage it so perfectly that its prey cannot see
its stealthy approach. The smaller jungle cat,
which is a light brown animal and the leopard
cat, which is a little bigger than a domestic cat,
are very rare. The most typical predator of the
HImalayas is the snow leopard, which is very
rare and poached for its beautiful skin which is
pale grey with dark grey ring-like markings.
Indian
wild ass
Nilgiri Tahr
Tiger
Leopard
The wolf, jackal, fox and the wild dog  or
‘dhole’ form a group called canids. Another
threatened predator is the Himalayan wolf.
The wolves are now highly threatened as they
have become increasingly dependent on
shepherd’s flocks. Thus shepherds constantly
find ways to kill the wolves.
Snow Leopard
vores. The males are blue-gray. Nilgai have white
markings on the legs and head. They have short
strong spike-like horns.

--- Page 21 ---
101Biodiversity
One of the common monkey species of the for-
est is the bonnet macaque, which has a red
face, a very long tail and a whorl of hair on the
scalp which looks like a cap. Our other com-
mon monkey is the rhesus macaque, which is
smaller and has a shorter tail than the bonnet.
A rare macaque is the lion-tailed macaque
found only in a few forests of the southern
Western Ghats and Annamalai ranges. It is black
in colour, has long hair, a grey mane and a tas-
sel at the end of its tail that looks like a lion’s
tail. The common langur has a black face and
is known as the Hanuman monkey. The rare
golden langur, is golden yellow in colour and
lives along the banks of the Manas River in
Assam. The capped langur is an uncommon
species of Northeast India. The rare black nilgiri
langur lives in the southern Western Ghats,
Nilgiris and Annamalais.
Birds:
There are over 1200 bird species found in India
in different habitats. Most of our forest birds
are specially adapted to life in certain forest
types. Some Himalayan species however can also
Wolf
Fox
Hornbill
Paradise
flycatcher
Bee-eater
be seen in the Western
Ghats. There are several
species of Hornbills that
live on fruit. They have
heavy curved beaks with a
projection on top.
Frugivores such as para-
keets, barbets and bul-
buls live on fruit and are
often seen eating Ficus
fruits such as those of banyan and peepal.
Bird of pray
Insectivorous birds of many species live on for-
est insects. They include various species of fly-
catchers, bee-eaters , and others. The male
paradise flycatcher is a small beautiful white bird
with a black head and two long white trailing
tail feathers. The female is brown and does not
have the long tail feathers. There are several
eagles, falcons and kites many of which are now
endangered.
Grasslands support many species of birds. The
most threatened species is the Great Indian
bustard, a large, brown stately bird with long
legs which struts about through grasslands look-

--- Page 22 ---
102 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
ing for locusts and grasshoppers. Another rare
group of threatened birds
are the floricans. There are
many species of quails,
partridges, larks, munias
and other grain eating birds
that are adapted to grass-
lands.
There are several species of
aquatic birds such as waders,
gulls and terns,  which live
along the seashore and go out
fishing many kilometers to the
sea. Many of these birds have
lost their coastal habitats due
to pollution. Aquatic birds in
freshwater are those with long legs and are
known as waders such as stilts and sandpip-
ers. The other group form birds that swim on
water such as several species of ducks and
geese.
There are many species of
spectacular large birds as-
sociated with water or
marshy areas. These in-
clude different species of
storks, cranes, spoon-
bills, flamingo and peli-
cans. Many aquatic species
are migrants. They breed
in Northern Europe or Siberia and come to India
in thousands during winter.
Reptiles:
India has a wide
variety of lizards,
snakes and turtles,
with a high level of
endemism. The liz-
ards include the
common gar-
den lizard,
Fan throated
lizard ,
Chamelion,
Skink, Com-
mon Monitor and Water Monitor. Some of
these are threatened due to trade in reptile skins.
Indian snakes include the Rock Python,
Russell’s viper and the Vine snake. We rarely
appreciate the fact
that only a few spe-
cies of snakes are
poisonous and most
snakes are harm-
less. The Star tor-
toise  and
Travancore tor-
toise are now rare. The Olive Ridley and Flap-
shell turtle are the well-known turtles of India.
Many turtles are becoming increasingly rare due
to poaching of adults and eggs. The crocodile
is our largest reptile
which is poached for
its prized skin. The
gharial is endemic to
India and is highly
threatened.
Amphibia:
Most of the amphibians found in India are frogs
and toads. These include several species like the
Indian Bull frog, Tree frog, etc. These amphib-
ians are mostly found in the hotspots in the
Northeast and the Western Ghats. It is now
thought that global warming and increasing lev-
Star
tortoise
Gharial
Great Indian
Bustard
Stilt
Flamingo
Monitor
Lizard
Fanthroated Lizard
Partridge

--- Page 23 ---
103Biodiversity
els of UV radiation may be seriously affecting
amphibian populations in some areas.
Invertebrates:
Invertebrates include a va-
riety of taxa that inhabit
both terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. Microscopic
animals like protozoa and
zooplankton form the basis of the food chain
in aquatic habitats.
Coral  is formed by
colonies of polyp like
animals. Worms, mol-
luscs (snails), spiders,
crabs, jellyfish, octo-
pus are a few of the
better known invertebrates found in India.
There are more than a mil-
lion insect species on earth
that are known to science.
They include grasshop-
pers, bugs, beetles, ants,
bees, butterflies  and
moths. India is rich in its but-
terfly and moth species.
Marine Life:
Marine ecosystems are most frequently associ-
ated with fish and crustacea like crabs and
shrimp, which we use as food. The other spe-
cies that are endangered include the marine
turtles, which are reptiles, and whales that are
mammals. There are a large number of species
of freshwater fish found in our Indian rivers and
lakes that are now threatened by the introduc-
tion of fish from abroad as well as due to being
Snail
Crab
Spider
Beetle
Marine Life


--- Page 24 ---
104 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
introduced from one river into another. Fish are
also now seriously affected by pollution. Ma-
rine fisheries are being over harvested in our
coastal waters and the fish catch has decreased
seriously over the last few years. Mechanized
boats with giant, small-meshed nets are a ma-
jor cause of depleting this resource. There are
many endangered fish such as the Mahseer
which once grew to over a meter in length.
Many species of marine animals such as the
whales, sharks and dolphins that live in the
Indian Ocean are now threatened by extinction
due to fishing in the deep sea.
For further details see:
1) CD ROM on ‘The Biodiversity of India’, Mapin
Publications, Ahmedabad, mapin@icenet.net
2) The Book of Indian Animals, SH Prater, BNHS.
3) The Book of Indian Birds, Salim Ali, BNHS.
4.9 CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY: IN-
SITU AND EX-SITU
4.9.1 In-situ conservation
Biodiversity at all its levels, genetic species and
as intact ecosystems, can be best preserved in-
situ by setting aside an adequate representa-
tion of wilderness as ‘
Protected Areas’. These
should consist of a network of National Parks
and Wildlife Sanctuaries with each distinctive
ecosystem included in the network. Such a net-
work would preserve the total diversity of life
of a region.
In the past National Parks and Sanctuaries in
India were notified to preserve major wildlife
species such as tigers, lions, elephants, and deer.
The objective of these areas should be expanded
to the preservation of relatively intact natural
ecosystems, where biological diversity – from
microscopic unicellular plants and animals, to
the giant trees and major mammals – can all be
preserved.
Project Tiger: Project Tiger was launched
by the Government of India with the sup-
port of WWF-International in 1973 and was
the first such initiative aimed at protecting
this key species and all its habitats. Project
Tiger was initiated in nine Tiger Reserves in
different ecosystems of the country cover-
ing an area of 16339 sq km. By 2001 the
number of Tiger Reserves increased to 27,
covering an area of 37761 sq km. The tiger
count climbed from 268 in 1972 in the nine
Tiger Reserves, to around 1500 in 1997 in
the 23 Tiger Reserves. The Project tiger rec-
ognized the fact that tigers cannot be pro-
tected in isolation, and that to protect the
tiger, its habitat needed to be protected.
Crocodile Conservation: Crocodiles have
been threatened as their skin is used for
making leather articles. This led to the near
extinction of crocodiles in the wild in the
1960s in India.
A Crocodile Breeding and Conservation Pro-
gram was initiated in 1975 to protect the
remaining population of crocodilians in their
natural habitat and by creating breeding
centers. It is perhaps one of the most suc-
cessful ex situ conservation breeding projects
in the country.
Crocodiles have been extensively bred in over
30 captive breeding centers, zoos and other
sites where successful breeding takes place.
Thousands of crocodiles of all three species
have been bred and restocked in 20 natural
water bodies.

--- Page 25 ---
105Biodiversity
However species cannot be protected individu-
ally as they are all inter dependent on each other.
Thus the whole ecosystem must be protected.
The biologist’s view point deals with areas that
are relatively species rich, or those where rare,
threatened or endangered species are found,
or those with ‘endemic’ species which are not
found elsewhere. As rare endemic species are
found only in a small area these easily become
extinct due to human activity. Such areas must
be given an added importance as their
biodiversity is a special feature of the region.
Animals such as elephants require different types
of habitat to feed in during different seasons.
They utilize open grasslands after the rains when
the young grass shoots are highly nutritious. As
the grasses dry, the elephants move into the
forest to feed on foliage from the trees. A Pro-
tected Area that is meant to protect elephants
must therefore be large enough and include di-
verse habitat types to support a complete
complement of inter linked species.
Wildlife Sanctuaries and National Parks of
India: There are 589 Protected Areas in India of
which 89 are National Parks and 500 are Wild-
life Sanctuaries. They include a variety of eco-
systems and habitats. Some have been created
in order to protect highly endangered species
of wild plants and animals found nowhere else
in the world.
The Great Himalayan National Park is the
largest sanctuary in this ecosystem and is one
of the last homes of the beautiful snow leop-
ard. Dachigam Sanctuary is the only place
where the rare Hangul or Kashmir stag is found.
There are several Sanctuaries in the Terai region,
Kaziranga National Park is the most famous
which has elephant, wild buffalo, gaur, wild
boar, swamp deer, and hog deer, in large num-
bers, as well as tiger and leopard. Its bird life is
extremely rich and includes ducks, geese, peli-
cans and storks. The Manas Sanctuary, in ad-
dition to the above Terai species, also includes
the rare golden langur and the very rare pygmy
hog, the smallest wild boar in the world. The
florican is found only in a few undisturbed grass-
lands in the Terai sanctuaries.
In the sal forests of Madhya Pradesh, there are
several Protected Areas. Kanha offers a won-
derful opportunity to observe wild tigers from
elephant back. It is the only Protected Area in
which a sub species of the Barasingha is found.
Bharatpur is one of the most famous water bird
sanctuaries in the world. Thousands of ducks,
geese, herons, and other wading birds can be
seen here. This is the only home of the very rare
Siberian crane which migrates to India every
winter. During the last 20 years, the 30 or 40
Siberian cranes have dwindled to only 2 or 3.
During 2002-3 no cranes were seen and it is
possible that this beautiful bird will never again
come to India.
In the Thar desert, the wild life is protected in
the Desert National Park. Here large numbers
of black buck, neelgai and chinkara can be seen.
The Great Indian Bustard lives in these arid lands.
Ranthambor was the most well known sanc-
tuary for observing tigers in the wild till about 3
or 4 years ago. Since then many tigers have been
killed by poachers.
Project Elephant : Project Elephant was
launched in 1992 to ensure the long-term
survival of a viable population of elephants
in their natural habitats in north and north-
eastern India and south India. It is being
implemented in 12 States. In spite of this,
our elephant herds are at threat as their habi-
tat is shrinking and their migration routes
are disrupted by human activities.

--- Page 26 ---
106 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
The Great and the Little Rann of Kutch have
been made into sanctuaries to protect the very
rare wild ass, the flamingo, the star tortoise and
the desert fox.
In Gujarat, the Gir Sanctuary protects the last
population of the majestic Asiatic lion. This thorn
and deciduous forest is also the home of large
herds of chital, sambhar, and nilgai.
The Sanctuaries of the Western Ghats and as-
sociated hill ranges protect some of the most
diverse forest types in the country. The few ex-
amples of highly threatened species include the
Malabar giant squirrel, the flying squirrel and a
variety of hill birds, several species of amphib-
ians, reptiles and insects. These regions are also
rich in highly endemic plant life. Sanctuaries such
as Bhimashankar, Koyana, Chandoli and
Radhanagari preserve this rich flora in
Maharashtra, Bandipur, Bhadra, Dandeli,
Nagarhole, etc. in Karnataka, and Eraviculum,
Perambiculum, Periyar, Silent Valley , in
Kerala.
In the Nilgiri Hills the rich forest Sanctuaries pro-
tect some of the last pockets of the Indian el-
ephant in South India. Examples include
Bandipur, Madhumalai, Wynad and Bhadra.
During the last 10 years, a large number of the
great tusker elephants of this region have been
ruthlessly killed for their ivory. Now very few of
these magnificent animals are left in these
jungles.
Two important sanctuaries meant for preserva-
tion of coastal ecosystems are the Chilka Lake
and Point Calimere. The Sunderbans protect
the largest mangrove delta in India. The Ma-
rine National Park in Gujarat protects shallow
areas in the sea, islands, coral reefs and exten-
sive mudflats.
Over a hundred Protected Areas have been cre-
ated in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands to
preserve their very special island ecosystems.
CASE STUDY
Orissa – Olive Ridley Turtles
Every year at Gahirmatha and two other sites
on the Orissa coast, hundreds of thousands
of Olive Ridley turtles congregate on the
beach, between December and April, for
mass nesting. This was the largest nesting
site for the Olive Ridleys in the world. In 1999
by the end of March it was estimated that
around 200,000 turtles had nested at the
Gahirmatha beach. Marine biologists believe
that only one out of every 1000 eggs actu-
ally matures into an adult.
There are severe threats to these nesting
sites. Shrinking nesting sites, construction of
roads and buildings close to these rooker-
ies, and other infrastructure development
projects hamper nesting. Trawler fishing is
another large threat to the turtles.
After its ‘discovery’ in 1974, the beach was
notified as a Sanctuary (the Bhitarkanaika
Sanctuary) and was closed for hunting.
Recognising the threats to turtles from fish-
ing by large trawlers, the Orissa Marine Fish-
eries Regulation Act was passed in 1982. This
Act prohibits trawling within 10 km of the
coastline throughout the state and makes it
mandatory for all trawlers to use Turtle Ex-
cluder Devices (TEDs). In 2001, the State Gov-
ernment of Orissa declared that a five month
period between January to May should con-
stitute a no-fishing season for a distance of
20 km from the coastline.
Apart form these initiatives, Operation
Kachhapa is being coordinated by the Wild-
life Protection Society of India, Delhi and
Wildlife Society of Orissa with many local
NGOs as partners. The Orissa Forest Depart-
ment, WII, Dehra Dun and the Coast Guard
are also involved in the Project.

--- Page 27 ---
107Biodiversity
The need for an Integrated Protected Area
System (IPAS): Protected Areas, to be effec-
tive, must be established in every biogeographic
region. A relatively larger representation must
be included of highly fragile ecosystems, areas
of high species diversity or high endemism. Pro-
tected Areas must also be integrated with each
other by establishing corridors between adja-
cent areas wherever possible so that wildlife can
move between them.
In our country, which has a rapidly growing
human population, it is not easily feasible to set
aside more and more land to create Protected
Areas. The need to provide a greater amount of
land for agricultural and other needs has be-
come an increasing cause of concern in land and
resource management. This forms a major im-
pediment for creating new Protected Areas.
Having said this, there is an urgent need to add
to our Protected Areas to preserve our very rich
biological diversity. Much of the natural wilder-
ness has already undergone extensive changes.
The residual areas that have high levels of spe-
cies richness, endemism or endangered plants
and animals must be notified as National Parks
and Wildlife Sanctuaries. Other areas can be
made into Community Conserved Areas which
are managed by local people.
The International Union for Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources states that it is
essential to include at least 10% of all ecosys-
tems as Protected Areas if biodiversity is to be
conserved in the long-term.
India has only 5% of land in its 589 Protected
Areas in 2004. However much of this includes
plantations of sal or teak, which were devel-
oped for timber in the past and are thus rela-
tively poor in diversity and have a low level of
‘naturalness’. There are only a few good grass-
lands left in our country that are notified as Pro-
tected Areas. Some are overgrazed wastelands
in areas that were once flourishing grasslands.
Most of these areas have a low biological value
and need careful management to allow them
to revert to a more ‘natural’ state, with their
full complement of plants and animals. Only a
few wetlands have been made into Sanctuar-
ies. These require better management.
A major strategy to reduce impacts on the
biodiversity of the PAs should be to provide a
sustainable source of resources for local people
living around them. A Protected Area curtails
their traditional grazing practices and access
fuelwood sources. These resources must be pro-
vided by developing them in buffer areas. Plan-
tations of fuel wood and good grassland
management in areas outside Protected Areas
can help reduce the pressure on the habitat of
wildlife in the Protected Area. Management
must ensure that local people derive a direct
economic benefit from the presence of the PA.
Involving local people in Protected Area man-
agement and developing tourist facilities that
support the income generation for local people
helps in involving their support for the Protected
Area.
A carefully designed management plan which
incorporates an ‘ecodevelopment’ component
aimed at providing a source of fuel wood, fod-
der and alternate income generation for local
people, is an important aspect of PA manage-
ment.
There are several species of plants and animals
that survive without protection outside our cur-
rent network of PAs. As it is not practical to
notify more PAs without affecting the lives of
people, alternate strategies such as Community
Reserves or Community Conserved Areas need
to be created. These should be managed by lo-
cal people to bring about the conservation of
biodiversity while using the area’s resources in
an equitable and sustainable way. A Commu-
nity Conserved Area must have specific conser-
vation goals that can be achieved without
compromising the area’s utilitarian potential.

--- Page 28 ---
108 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
A major drive for conservation of biological di-
versity can only come from a mass environmen-
tal education program on the value of protecting
our dwindling biological resources.
4.9.2 Ex-situ conservation
Conservation of a species is best done by pro-
tecting its habitat along with all the other spe-
cies that live in it in nature. This is known as
in-situ conservation, which is conserving a spe-
cies in its own environment by creating National
Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries. However, there
are situations in which an endangered species
is so close to extinction that unless alternate
methods are instituted, the species may be rap-
idly driven to extinction. This strategy is known
as ex-situ conservation, i.e. outside its natural
habitat in a carefully controlled situation such
as a botanical garden for plants or a zoological
park for animals, where there is expertise to
multiply the species under artificially managed
conditions. These breeding programs for rare
plants and animals are however more expen-
sive than managing a Protected Area.
There is also another form of preserving a plant
by preserving its germ plasm in a gene bank so
that it can be used if needed in future. This is
even more expensive.
When an animal is on the brink of extinction, it
must be carefully bred so that inbreeding does
not lead to the genetic makeup becoming weak.
Breeding from the same stock can lead to poorly
adapted progeny or even inability to get enough
offspring.
Modern breeding programs are done in zoos
that provide for all the animal’s needs, includ-
ing enclosures that simulate their wild habitats.
There may also be a need to assist breeding ar-
tificially. Thus while most zoos are meant to pro-
vide visitors with a visual experience of seeing a
wild animal close up, and provide the visitors
with information about the species, a modern
zoo has to go beyond these functions that in-
clude breeding of endangered species as a con-
servation measure.
In India, successful ex situ conservation programs
have been done for all our three species of croco-
diles. This has been highly successful. Another
recent success has been the breeding of the very
rare pygmy hog in Gauhati zoo. Delhi zoo has
successfully bred the rare Manipur brow ant-
lered deer.
However the most important step of a success-
ful breeding program is the reintroduction of a
species into its original wild habitat. This requires
rehabilitation of the degraded habitat and re-
moval of the other causes such as poaching,
disturbance, or other manmade influences that
have been the primary cause of reducing the
population of the species.
Conservation of cultivars and livestock
breeds: There were an estimated thirty thou-
sand varieties of rice grown in India till about 50
years ago. Now only a few of these are still
grown. The new varieties which are now being
cultivated everywhere have been developed
using germ plasm of these original types of rice.
If all the traditional varieties vanish completely
it will be difficult to develop new disease resis-
tant varieties of rice in the future. Several vari-
eties have been preserved in gene banks.
However, this is both very expensive and risky.
Encouraging farmers to continue to grow sev-
eral traditional varieties is thus an important
concern for the future of mankind. At present
gene bank collections have over 34 thousand
cereals and 22 thousand pulses.

--- Page 29 ---
109Biodiversity
In the past, domestic animals were selected and
bred for their ability to adapt to local conditions.
Traditional agropastoralists in India have selec-
tively bred livestock for 2 to 3 thousand years.
India has 27 breeds of cattle, 40 breeds of sheep,
22 breeds of goats, and 8 breeds of buffaloes.
These traditional breeds must be maintained for
their genetic variability.
CASE STUDY
Beej Bachao Andolan (Save the Seeds
Movement)
This movement began in the Himalayan foot-
hills. The members have collected seeds of
diverse crops in Garhwal. The movement has
successfully conserved hundreds of local rice
varieties, rajma, pulses, millets, vegetables,
spices and herbs. Many different varieties are
being grown as an outcome of this program
in local farmer’s fields. This has also been
supported by local women’s groups who felt
these varieties were better than those pro-
vided by the green revolution. In contrast,
men who were interested in cash returns in
a short time found it difficult to appreciate
the benefits of growing indigenous variet-
ies.
