4.4 BIODIVERSITY AT GLOBAL, NATIONAL
AND LOCAL LEVELS
There are at present 1.8 million species known
and documented by scientists in the world. How-
ever, scientists have estimated that the number
of species of plants and animals on earth could
vary from 1.5 to 20 billion! Thus the majority of
species are yet to be discovered.
Most of the world’s bio-rich nations are in the
South, which are the developing nations. In con-
trast, the majority of the countries capable of
exploiting biodiversity are Northern nations, in
the economically developed world. These na-
tions however have low levels of biodiversity.
Thus the developed world has come to support
the concept that biodiversity must be consid-
ered to be a ‘global resource’. However, if
biodiversity should form a ‘common property
resource’ to be shared by all nations, there is no
reason to exclude oil, or uranium, or even intel-
lectual and technological expertise as global as-
sets. India’s sovereignty over its biological
diversity cannot be compromised without a revo-
lutionary change in world thinking about shar-
ing of all types of natural resources.

--- Page 9 ---
89Biodiversity
Countries with diversities higher than India are
located in South America such as Brazil, and
South East Asian countries such as Malaysia and
Indonesia. The species found in these countries,
however, are different from our own. This makes
it imperative to preserve our own biodiversity
as a major economic resource. While few of the
other ‘megadiversity nations’ have developed
the technology to exploit their species for bio-
technology and genetic engineering, India is ca-
pable of doing so.
Throughout the world, the value of biologically
rich natural areas is now being increasingly ap-
preciated as being of unimaginable value. In-
ternational agreements such as the World
Heritage Convention attempt to protect and
support such areas. India is a signatory to the
convention and has included several protected
Areas as World Heritage sites. These include
Manas on the border between Bhutan and In-
dia, Kaziranga in Assam, Bharatpur in U.P.,
Nandadevi in the Himalayas, and the Sunderbans
in the Ganges delta in West Bengal.
India has also signed the Convention in the
Trade of Endangered Species (CITES) which
is intended to reduce the utilization of endan-
gered plants and animals by controlling trade in
their products and in the pet trade.
