4.1 INTRODUCTION
The great variety of life on earth has provided
for man’s needs over thousands of years. This
diversity of living creatures forms a support sys-
tem which has been used by each civilization
for its growth and development. Those that used
this “bounty of nature” carefully and sustainably
survived. Those that overused or misused it dis-
integrated.
Science has attempted to classify and catego-
rize the variability in nature for over a century.
This has led to an understanding of its organi-
zation into communities of plants and animals.
This information has helped in utilizing the
earth’s biological wealth for the benefit of hu-
manity and has been integral to the process of
‘development’. This includes better health care,
better crops and the use of these life forms as
raw material for industrial growth which has led
to a higher standard of living for the developed
world. However this has also produced the
modern consumerist society, which has had a
negative effect on the diversity of biological re-
sources upon which it is based. The diversity of
life on earth is so great that if we use it
sustainably we can go on developing new prod-
ucts from biodiversity for many generations. This
can only happen if we manage biodiversity as a
precious resource and prevent the extinction of
species.
Definition:
‘Biological diversity’ or biodiversity is that part
of nature which includes the differences in genes
among the individuals of a species, the variety
and richness of all the plant and animal species
at different scales in space, locally, in a region,
in the country and the world, and various types
of ecosystems, both terrestrial and aquatic,
within a defined area.
What is biodiversity?
Biological diversity deals with the degree of
nature’s variety in the biosphere. This variety can
be observed at three levels; the genetic variabil-
ity within a species, the variety of species within
a community, and the organisation of species
in an area into distinctive plant and animal com-
munities constitutes ecosystem diversity.
4.1.1 Genetic diversity
Each member of any animal or plant species dif-
fers widely from other individuals in its genetic
makeup because of the large number of com-
binations possible in the genes that give every
individual specific characteristics. Thus, for ex-
ample, each human being is very different from
all others. This genetic variability is essential for
a healthy breeding population of a species. If
the number of breeding individuals is reduced,
the dissimilarity of genetic makeup is reduced
and in-breeding occurs. Eventually this can lead
to the extinction of the species. The diversity in
wild species forms the ‘gene pool’ from which
our crops and domestic animals have been de-
veloped over thousands of years. Today the va-
riety of nature’s bounty is being further
harnessed by using wild relatives of crop plants
to create new varieties of more productive crops
and to breed better domestic animals. Modern
biotechnology manipulates genes for develop-
ing better types of medicines and a variety of
industrial products.
4.1.2 Species diversity
The number of species of plants and animals
that are present in a region constitutes its spe-
cies diversity. This diversity is seen both in natu-
ral ecosystems and in agricultural ecosystems.
Some areas are more rich in species than oth-
ers. Natural undisturbed tropical forests have a
much greater species richness than plantations
developed by the Forest Department for timber

--- Page 3 ---
83Biodiversity
production. A natural forest ecosystem provides
a large number of non-wood products that lo-
cal people depend on such as fruit, fuel wood,
fodder, fiber, gum, resin and medicines. Timber
plantations do not provide the large variety of
goods that are essential for local consumption.
In the long-term the economic sustainable re-
turns from non-wood forest products is said to
be greater than the returns from felling a forest
for its timber. Thus the value of a natural forest,
with all its species richness is much greater than
a plantation. Modern intensive agricultural eco-
systems have a relatively lower diversity of crops
than traditional agropastoral farming systems
where multiple crops were planted.
At present conservation scientists have been able
to identify and categorise about 1.8 million spe-
cies on earth. However, many new species are
being identified, especially in the flowering
plants and insects. Areas that are rich in species
diversity are called ‘hotspots’ of diversity. India
is among the world’s 15 nations that are excep-
tionally rich in species diversity.
4.1.3 Ecosystem diversity
There are a large variety of different ecosystems
on earth, which have their own complement of
distinctive inter linked species based on the dif-
ferences in the habitat. Ecosystem diversity can
be described for a specific geographical region,
or a political entity such as a country, a State or
a taluka. Distinctive ecosystems include land-
scapes such as forests, grasslands, deserts,
mountains, etc., as well as aquatic ecosystems
such as rivers, lakes, and the sea. Each region
also has man-modified areas such as farmland
or grazing pastures.
An ecosystem is referred to as ‘natural’ when it
is relatively undisturbed by human activities, or
‘modified’ when it is changed to other types of
uses, such as farmland or urban areas. Ecosys-
tems are most natural in wilderness areas. If
natural ecosystems are overused or misused their
productivity eventually decreases and they are
then said to be degraded. India is exceptionally
rich in its ecosystem diversity.
Evolution and the Genesis of Biodiversity:
The origins of life on earth some three and a
half billion years ago are obscure. Life was prob-
ably initiated as a product of organic reactions
in the Earth’s primordial seas. Alternative possi-
bilities such as life beginning in a muddy ooze,
or of life having been seeded from outer space
have also been suggested. Once life took hold
on the planet, it began gradually to diversify.
Unicellular unspecialized forms gradually evolved
into complex multi-cellular plants and animals.
Evolution is related to the ability of living organ-
isms to adapt to changes in their environment.
Thus the abiotic changes in nature such as cli-
matic and atmospheric upheavals, repeated gla-
ciations, continental drift and the formation of
geographical barriers, segregated different com-
munities of plants and animals and gradually
lead to the formation of new species over mil-
lions of years.
Most species appear to have a life span extend-
ing over several million years. Their adaptability
to gradual changes in their habitat, and inter-
actions with newly formed species produce
groups of inter linked organisms that continue
to evolve together. Food chains, prey-predator
relationships, parasitism (complete dependence
on another species), commensalism (a partner-
ship beneficial to both species), etc. are impor-
tant examples. Behavioural patterns of the
different species comprising a community of spe-
cies links them to each other through their
breeding biology, feeding patterns, migrations,
etc. As ancient species became extinct due to
geological upheavals, they left behind empty
‘niches’ in the habitat that stimulated existing
species to fill them through the formation of
new species. The Earth’s ancient history has seen
periods of mega extinctions, which have been
followed by periods of formation of new spe-
cies. Though these repeatedly led to a drastic

--- Page 4 ---
84 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
reduction in the number of species, the diver-
sity of life recuperated each time by gradually
increasing the number of species existing on
earth. This however took millions of years, as
evolution is a very slow process. Thus when man
came on the scene some 2 million years ago,
the earth was more rich in species than ever
before. During the recent past however, extinc-
tions due to the activities of modern man have
begun to take place so rapidly that nature has
had no time to evolve new species. The earth is
loosing species more rapidly than ever before.
The diversity of life at all three organisational
levels, genetic, species and ecosystem, is thus
being rapidly modified by modern man. This is
a great loss to future generations who will fol-
low us.
