4.7 THREATS TO BIODIVERSITY: HABITAT
LOSS, POACHING OF WILDLIFE, MAN-WILD-
LIFE CONFLICTS
Man has begun to overuse or misuse most of
these natural ecosystems. Due to this ‘unsus-
tainable’ resource-use, once productive forests
and grasslands have been turned into deserts
and wasteland have increased all over the world.
Mangroves have been cleared for fuelwood and
prawn farming, which has led to a decrease in
the habitat essential for breeding of marine fish.
Wetlands have been drained to increase agri-
cultural land. These changes have grave eco-
nomic implications in the longer term.
The current destruction of the remaining large
areas of wilderness habitats, especially in the
CASE STUDY
Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary – Sawai
Madhopur, Rajashtan
While conservation efforts are associated
with conflicts between villagers and Forest
Officials in most Protected Areas across the
country, the Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary in
Rajasthan has involved local community ini-
tiatives for conservation and regeneration.
The Sanctuary was initiated in 1983, over
674 sq km forming a part of the 1334 sq km
Ranthambore Tiger Reserve. It is located
within the Karauli and Sapotra blocks of
Sawai Madhopur district.
The primary occupation of the predominant
Meena and Gujjar communities is pastoral-
ism and subsistence agriculture.
Pressures on the sanctuary included migrant
grazers known as the Rabaris, who came
from the Mewar region of Rajasthan with
herds of over 150,000 sheep. Other pres-
sures were from exploitation of timber and
fuelwood and mining. The threat poised by
the migrant grazers spurred the formation
of the “Baragaon ki Panchayat” in 1990,
which in turn initiated a ‘Bhed Bhagao
Andolan’.
The Forest Department supported the villag-
ers in the formation of Forest Protection
Committees and Van Suraksha Samitis. The
benefits of involving local people in protec-
tion of their resources were obvious. Illegal
felling was checked. The use of forest re-
sources for local use was monitored. The
Forest Protection Committees (FPCs)  were
also successful in stopping the mining in the
Sanctuary. Mining is now banned in the
Sanctuary. The people not only protect their
forests but also use their resources judi-
ciously.

--- Page 12 ---
92 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
super diverse tropical forests and coral reefs, is
the most important threat worldwide to
biodiversity. Scientists have estimated that hu-
man activities are likely to eliminate approxi-
mately 10 million species by the year 2050.
There are about 1.8 million species of plants and
animals, both large and microscopic, known to
science in the world at present. The number of
species however is likely to be greater by a fac-
tor of at least 10. Plants and insects as well as
other forms of life not known to science are
continually being identified in the worlds’ ‘hot-
spots’ of diversity. Unfortunately at the present
rate of extinction about 25% of the worlds’ spe-
cies will undergo extinction fairly rapidly. This
may occur at the rate of 10 to 20 thousand spe-
cies per year, a thousand to ten thousand times
faster than the expected natural rate! Human
actions could well exterminate 25% of the
world’s species within the next twenty or thirty
years. Much of this mega extinction spasm  is
related to human population growth, industri-
alization and changes in land-use patterns. A
major part of these extinctions will occur in ‘bio-
rich’ areas such as tropical forests, wetlands, and
coral reefs. The loss of wild habitats due to rapid
human population growth and short term eco-
nomic development are major contributors to
the rapid global destruction of biodiversity.
Island flora and fauna having high endemism in
small isolated areas surrounded by sea have so
far been most seriously affected by human ac-
tivity, which has already led to extinction of many
island plants and animals (the dodo is a famous
example). Habitat loss also results from man’s
introduction of species from one area into an-
other, disturbing the balance in existing com-
munities. In the process, the purposely or
accidentally introduced organisms (
Eupatorium,
Lantana , Hyacinth, Congress grass or
Parthenium) have led to the extinction of many
local species.
Loss of species occurs due to the destruction of
natural ecosystems, either for conversion to
agriculture or industry, or by over-extraction of
their resources, or through pollution of air, wa-
ter and soil.
In India, forests and grasslands are continuously
being changed to agricultural land. Encroach-
ments have been legalized repeatedly. Similarly
natural wetland systems have been drained to
establish croplands resulting in loss of aquatic
species. Grasslands that were once sustainably
used by a relatively smaller number of human
beings and their cattle are either changed to
other forms of use or degraded by overgrazing.
CASE STUDY:
Kokkare Bellure – Karnataka: Co-exist-
ence (Man and Wildlife)
The pelican, which is an endangered species
breeds in large numbers at Kokkare Bellur
which is one of the ten known breeding sites
in India. Kokkare Bellure is a village in
Karnataka in Southern India. In December
every year, hundreds of spot billed pelicans,
painted storks, ibis and other birds migrate
to this area to establish breeding colonies
on the tall tamarind trees in the center of
the village. The local people have protected
the birds, believing that they bring good luck
with regard to rain and crops. The villagers
collect a rich supply of the natural fertilizer
that collects below the nests – the 
guano.
The droppings of fish-eating birds are rich in
nitrates.
The owners of the trees inhabited by the
birds dig deep pits under the trees, into which
the guano falls. Silt from nearby lakes and
ponds is mixed with the guano which is used
in their fields and sold as fertilizer. They have
now planted trees around their homes to
encourage nesting.

--- Page 13 ---
93Biodiversity
Our natural forests are being deforested for tim-
ber and replanted using teak, sal or other single
species for their timber value. Such plantations
do not support the same biological diversity as
a multi-storied natural forest, which has a closed
canopy and a rich understorey of vegetation.
When excessive firewood is collected from the
forest by lopping the branches of trees, the for-
est canopy is opened up and this alters local
biodiversity. Foraging cattle retard the regen-
eration of the forest as seedlings are constantly
trampled.
Increasing human population on the fringes of
our Protected Areas degrade forest ecosystems.
This is a major factor to consider in evaluating
the quality of the ecosystem. Repeated fires
started by local grazers to increase grass growth
ultimately reduces regeneration and lowers the
diversity of plant species. Without alternate
sources of fodder this pressure cannot be de-
creased.
Another factor that disrupts forest biodiversity
is the introduction of exotic weeds which are
not a part of the natural vegetation. Common
examples in India are lantana bushes, Eupato-
rium shrubs and ‘congress’ grass. These have
been imported into the country from abroad and
have invaded several large tracts of our natural
forests. These weeds spread at the expense of
the diverse range of indigenous undergrowth
species. The impact on the diversity of insect,
bird and other wildlife species, though not ad-
equately studied, is quite obvious.
In our country a variety of traditional farming
techniques have evolved over several centuries.
Cultivation by slash and burn in the Himalayas,
and ‘rab’ by lopping of tree branches to act as a
wood-ash fertilizer in the Western Ghats, are
two such systems. When human population in
these areas was low, these were sustainable
methods of agriculture. Unfortunately these ar-
eas now have a large number of people who
subsist largely on forest agriculture. These meth-
ods are now unsustainable and are leading to a
loss of forest biodiversity.
Overharvesting of fish, especially by trawling is
leading to serious depletion of fish stocks. Turtles
are being massacred off the coast of Orissa. The
rare whale shark, a highly endangered species,
is being killed off the coast of Gujarat.
Poaching: Specific threats to certain animals are
related to large economic benefits. Skin and
bones from tigers, ivory from elephants, horns
from rhinos and the perfume from the must deer
are extensively used abroad. Bears are killed for
their gall bladders. Corals and shells are also col-
lected for export or sold on the beaches of
Chennai and Kanyakumari. A variety of wild
plants with real or at times dubious medicinal
value are being over harvested. The commonly
collected plants include Rauvolfia, Nuxvomica,
Datura, etc. Collection of garden plants includes
orchids, ferns and moss.
The Rights of Species
We do not see all the varied functions that
biodiversity plays in our lives because they
are not obvious. We rarely see how they are
controlling our environment unless we study
nature. Thus we tend to take short-term ac-
tions that can have serious impacts on
biodiversity leading to even extinction of spe-
cies by disturbing their habitats. Man has no
right to do so. We only share this planet with
millions of other species that also have a right
to survive on earth. It is morally wrong to
allow man’s actions to lead to the extinction
of species.

--- Page 14 ---
94 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
