4.3 VALUE OF BIODIVERSITY
Environmental services from species and eco-
systems are essential at global, regional and lo-
cal levels. Production of oxygen, reducing carbon
dioxide, maintaining the water cycle, protect-
ing soil are important services. The world now
acknowledges that the loss of biodiversity con-
tributes to global climatic changes. Forests are
the main mechanism for the conversion of car-
bon dioxide into carbon and oxygen. The loss
of forest cover, coupled with the increasing re-
lease of carbon dioxide and other gases through
industrialization contributes to the ‘greenhouse
effect’. Global warming is melting ice caps, re-
sulting in a rise in the sea level which will sub-
merge the low lying areas in the world. It is
causing major atmospheric changes, leading to
increased temperatures, serious droughts in
some areas and unexpected floods in other ar-
eas.
Biological diversity is also essential for preserv-
ing ecological processes, such as fixing and re-
cycling of nutrients, soil formation, circulation
and cleansing of air and water, global life sup-
port (plants absorb CO
2, give out O2), maintain-

--- Page 5 ---
85Biodiversity
ing the water balance within ecosystems, wa-
tershed protection, maintaining stream and river
flows throughout the year, erosion control and
local flood reduction.
Food, clothing, housing, energy, medicines, are
all resources that are directly or indirectly linked
to the biological variety present in the biosphere.
This is most obvious in the tribal communities
who gather resources from the forest, or
fisherfolk who catch fish in marine or freshwa-
ter ecosystems. For others, such as agricultural
communities, biodiversity is used to grow their
crops to suit the environment. Urban commu-
nities generally use the greatest amount of
goods and services, which are all indirectly drawn
from natural ecosystems.
It has become obvious that the preservation of
biological resources is essential for the well-be-
ing and the long-term survival of mankind. This
diversity of living organisms which is present in
the wilderness, as well as in our crops and live-
stock, plays a major role in human ‘develop-
ment’. The preservation of ‘biodiversity’ is
therefore integral to any strategy that aims at
improving the quality of human life.
4.3.1 Consumptive use value
The direct utilisation of timber, food, fuelwood,
fodder by local communities.
The biodiversity held in the ecosystem provides
forest dwellers with all their daily needs, food,
building material, fodder, medicines and a vari-
ety of other products. They know the qualities
and different uses of wood from different spe-
cies of trees, and collect a large number of local
fruits, roots and plant material that they use as
food, construction material or medicines.
Fisherfolk are highly dependent on fish and
know where and how to catch fish and other
edible aquatic animals and plants.
Man and the Web of Life
The Biodiversity of an area influences every
aspect of the lives of people who inhabit it.
Their living space and their livelihoods de-
pend on the type of ecosystem. Even people
living in urban areas are dependent on the
ecological services provided by the wilder-
ness in the PAs. We frequently don’t see this
in everyday life as it is not necessarily overt.
It is linked with every service that nature pro-
vides us. The quality of water we drink and
use, the air we breathe, the soil on which
our food grows are all influenced by a wide
variety of living organisms both plants and
animals and the ecosystem of which each
species is linked with in nature.
While it is well known that plant life removes
carbon dioxide and releases the oxygen we
breathe, it is less obvious that fungi, small
soil invertebrates and even microbes are es-
sential for plants to grow.
That a natural forest maintains the water in
the river after the monsoon, or that the ab-
sence of ants could destroy life on earth, are
to be appreciated to understand how we are
completely dependent on the living ‘web of
life’ on earth.
The wilderness is an outcome of a long evo-
lutionary process that has created an
unimaginably large diversity of living species,
their genetic differences and the various eco-
systems on earth in which all living creatures
live. This includes mankind as well. Think
about this and we cannot but want to pro-
tect out earth’s unique biodiversity. We are
highly dependent on these living resources.

--- Page 6 ---
86 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
4.3.2 Productive use value
Marketable goods.
Value of MFP>Timber (which is part of sus-
tainable use).
The biotechnologist uses biorich areas to ‘pros-
pect’ and search for potential genetic proper-
ties in plants or animals that can be used to
develop better varieties of crops that are used
in farming and plantation programs or to de-
velop better livestock. To the pharmacist, bio-
logical diversity is the raw material from which
new drugs can be identified from plant or ani-
mal products. To industrialists, biodiversity is a
rich store-house from which to develop new
products. For the agricultural scientist the
biodiversity in the wild relatives of crop plants is
the basis for developing better crops.
Genetic diversity enables scientists and farmers
to develop better crops and domestic animals
through careful breeding. Originally this was
done by selecting or pollinating crops artificially
to get a more productive or disease resistant
strain. Today this is increasingly being done by
genetic engineering, selecting genes from one
plant and introducing them into another. New
crop varieties (cultivars) are being developed
using the genetic material found in wild rela-
tives of crop plants through biotechnology.
Even today, species of plants and animals are
being constantly discovered in the wild. Thus
these wild species are the building blocks for
the betterment of human life and their loss is a
great economic loss to mankind. Among the
known species, only a tiny fraction have been
investigated for their value in terms of food, or
their medicinal or industrial potential.
Preservation of biodiversity has now become
essential for industrial growth and economic
development. A variety of industries such as
pharmaceuticals are highly dependent on iden-
tifying compounds of great economic value from
the wide variety of wild species of plants located
in undisturbed natural forests. This is called bio-
logical prospecting.
4.3.3 Social values
While traditional societies which had a small
population and required less resources had pre-
served their biodiversity as a life supporting re-
source, modern man has rapidly depleted it even
to the extent of leading to the irrecoverable loss
due to extinction of several species. Thus apart
from the local use or sale of products of
biodiversity there is the social aspect in which
more and more resources are used by affluent
societies. The biodiversity has to a great extent
been preserved by traditional societies that val-
ued it as a resource and appreciated that its
depletion would be a great loss to their society.
The consumptive and productive value of
biodiversity is closely linked to social concerns
in traditional communities. ‘Ecosystem people’
value biodiversity as a part of their livelihood as
well as through cultural and religious sentiments.
A great variety of crops have been cultivated in
traditional agricultural systems and this permit-
ted a wide range of produce to be grown and
marketed throughout the year and acted as an
insurance against the failure of one crop. In re-
cent years farmers have begun to receive eco-
nomic incentives to grow cash crops for national
or international markets, rather than to supply
local needs. This has resulted in local food short-
ages, unemployment (cash crops are usually
mechanised), landlessness and increased vulner-
ability to drought and floods.

--- Page 7 ---
87Biodiversity
Commonly used modern drugs derived from plant sources:
DRUG PLANT SOURCE USE
Atropine Belladonna Anticholinergic: reduces intestinal pain in diarrhoea.
Bromelain Pineapple Controls tissue inflammation due to infection.
Caffeine Tea, Coffee Stimulant of the central nervous system.
Camphor Camphor tree Rebefacient: increases local blood supply.
Cocaine Cocoa Analgesic and local anesthetic: reduces pain and
prevents pain during surgery.
Codeine Opium poppy Analgesic: reduces pain.
Morphine Opium poppy Analgesic: controls pain.
Colchicine Autumn crocus Anticancer agent.
Digitoxin Common foxglove Cardiac stimulant used in heart diseases.
Diosgenin Wild yams Source of female contraceptive: prevents pregnancy.
L-Dopa Velvet bean Controls Parkinson’s Disease which leads to jerky
movements of the hands
Ergotamine Smut-of-rye or ergot Control of haemorrhage and migraine headaches.
Glaziovine ocotea glaziovii Antidepressant: Elevates mood of depressed patients.
Gossypol Cotton Male contraceptive.
Indicine N-oxide heliotropium indicum Anticancer agent.
Menthol Mint Rubefacient: increases local blood supply and reduces
pain on local application.
Monocrotaline Cotolaria sessiliflora Anticancer agent.
Papain Papaya Dissolves excess protein and mucus, during digestion.
Penicillin Penicillium fungi General antibiotic, skills bacteria and controls infection
by various micro-organisms.
Quinine Yellow cinochona Antimalarial.
Reserpine Indian snakeroot Reduces high blood pressure.
Scopolamine Thorn apple Sedative.
Taxol Pacific yew Anticancer (ovarian).
Vinblastine, Rosy periwinkle Anticancer agent: Controls cancer in children.
vincristine (Vinca rosea) (Sadaphali)
From: ‘The Diversity of Life’; Edward O. Wilson
(Norton Paperback. In association with Havard University Press – 1993)

--- Page 8 ---
88 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
4.3.4 Ethical and moral values
Ethical values related to biodiversity conserva-
tion are based on the importance of protecting
all forms of life. All forms of life have the right
to exist on earth. Man is only a small part of the
Earth’s great family of species. Don’t plants and
animals have an equal right to live and exist on
our planet which is like an inhabited spaceship?
We do not know if life as we know it exists else-
where in the universe. Do we have the right to
destroy life forms or do we have a duty to pro-
tect them?
Apart from the economic importance of con-
serving biodiversity, there are several cultural,
moral and ethical values which are associated
with the sanctity of all forms of life. Indian civi-
lization has over several generations preserved
nature through local traditions. This has been
an important part of the ancient philosophy of
many of our cultures. We have in our country a
large number of sacred groves or ‘deorais’ pre-
served by tribal people in several States. These
sacred groves around ancient sacred sites and
temples act as gene banks of wild plants.
4.3.5 Aesthetic value
Knowledge and an appreciation of the presence
of biodiversity for its own sake is another rea-
son to preserve it. Quite apart from killing
wildlife for food, it is important as a tourist at-
traction. Biodiversity is a beautiful and wonder-
ful aspect of nature. Sit in a forest and listen to
the birds. Watch a spider weave its complex
web. Observe a fish feeding. It is magnificent
and fascinating.
Symbols from wild species such as the lion of
Hinduism, the elephant of Buddhism and dei-
ties such as Lord Ganesh, and the vehicles of
several deities that are animals, have been ven-
erated for thousands of years. Valmiki begins
his epic story with a couplet on the unfortunate
killing of a crane by a hunter. The ‘Tulsi’ has
been placed at our doorsteps for centuries.
4.3.6 Option value
Keeping future possibilities open for their use is
called option value. It is impossible to predict
which of our species or traditional varieties of
crops and domestic animals will be of great use
in the future. To continue to improve cultivars
and domestic livestock, we need to return to
wild relatives of crop plants and animals. Thus
the preservation of biodiversity must also include
traditionally used strains already in existence in
crops and domestic animals.
